would come when there would be no more wars. The old prince disputed it
chaffingly, but without getting angry.

“Drain the blood from men’s veins and put in water instead, then
there will be no more war! Old women’s nonsense—old women’s
nonsense!” he repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately
on the shoulder, and then went up to the table where Prince Andrew,
evidently not wishing to join in the conversation, was looking over the
papers his father had brought from town. The old prince went up to him
and began to talk business.

“The marshal, a Count Rostóv, hasn’t sent half his contingent. He
came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner—I gave him a pretty
dinner!... And there, look at this.... Well, my boy,” the old prince
went on, addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder. “A
fine fellow—your friend—I like him! He stirs me up. Another says
clever things and one doesn’t care to listen, but this one talks
rubbish yet stirs an old fellow up. Well, go! Get along! Perhaps I’ll
come and sit with you at supper. We’ll have another dispute. Make
friends with my little fool, Princess Mary,” he shouted after Pierre,
through the door.

Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize the
strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charm was
not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family
and with the household. With the stern old prince and the gentle, timid
Princess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierre at once felt
like an old friend. They were all fond of him already. Not only Princess
Mary, who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims, gave him her
most radiant looks, but even the one-year-old “Prince Nicholas” (as
his grandfather called him) smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken
in his arms, and Michael Ivánovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at
him with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince.

The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre’s
account. And during the two days of the young man’s visit he was
extremely kind to him and told him to visit them again.

When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together, they
began to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new
acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anything but
what was good of him.





CHAPTER XV

When returning from his leave, Rostóv felt, for the first time, how
close was the bond that united him to Denísov and the whole regiment.

On approaching it, Rostóv felt as he had done when approaching his home
in Moscow. When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform
of his regiment, when he recognized red-haired Deméntyev and saw the
picket ropes of the roan horses, when Lavrúshka gleefully shouted to
his master, “The count has come!” and Denísov, who had been asleep
on his bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him,
and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival, Rostóv
experienced the same feeling as when his mother, his father, and his
sister had embraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could
not speak. The regiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear and
precious as his parents’ house.

When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had
been reassigned to his former squadron, had been on duty and had gone
out foraging, when he had again entered into all the little interests
of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one
narrow, unchanging frame, he experienced the same sense of peace, of
moral support, and the same sense of being at home here in his own
place, as he had felt under the parental roof. But here was none of
all that turmoil of the world at large, where he did not know his right
place and took mistaken decisions; here was no Sónya with whom he
ought, or ought not, to have an explanation; here was no possibility of
going there or not going there; here there were not twenty-four hours
in the day which could be spent in such a variety of ways; there was not
that innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or
farther from him than another; there were none of those uncertain and
undefined money relations with his father, and nothing to recall that
terrible loss to Dólokhov. Here, in the regiment, all was clear and
simple. The whole world was divided into two unequal parts: one, our
Pávlograd regiment; the other, all the rest. And the rest was no
concern of his. In the regiment, everything was definite: who was
lieutenant, who captain, who was a good fellow, who a bad one, and most
of all, who was a comrade. The canteenkeeper gave one credit, one’s
pay came every four months, there was nothing to think out or decide,
you had only to do nothing that was considered bad in the Pávlograd
regiment and, when given an order, to do what was clearly, distinctly,
and definitely ordered—and all would be well.

Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimental
life, Rostóv felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to
rest. Life in the regiment, during this campaign, was all the pleasanter
for him, because, after his loss to Dólokhov (for which, in spite
of all his family’s efforts to console him, he could not forgive
himself), he had made up his mind to atone for his fault by serving,
not as he had done before, but really well, and by being a perfectly
first-rate comrade and officer—in a word, a splendid man altogether, a
thing which seemed so difficult out in the world, but so possible in the
regiment.

After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents
in five years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but now resolved
to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his
parents.

Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultúsk
and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It was awaiting
the Emperor’s arrival and the beginning of a new campaign.

The Pávlograd regiment, belonging to that part of the army which had
served in the 1805 campaign, had been recruiting up to strength in
Russia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the
campaign. It had been neither at Pultúsk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and,
when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign,
was attached to Plátov’s division.

Plátov’s division was acting independently of the main army. Several
times parts of the Pávlograd regiment had exchanged shots with
the enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal
Oudinot’s carriages. In April the Pávlograds were stationed immovably
for some weeks near a totally ruined and deserted German village.

A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river broke,
and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisions for the
men nor fodder for the horses had been issued. As no transports could
arrive, the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villages,
searching for potatoes, but found few even of these.

Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled—if any
remained, they were worse than beggars and nothing more could be taken
from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of taking
anything from them, often gave them the last of their rations.

The Pávlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action, but had
lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness. In the hospitals,
death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever, or the swelling
that came from bad food, preferred to remain on duty, and hardly able
to drag their legs went to the front rather than to the hospitals.
When spring came on, the soldiers found a plant just showing out of the
ground that looked like asparagus, which, for some reason, they called
“Máshka’s sweet root.” It was very bitter, but they wandered
about the fields seeking it and dug it out with their sabers and ate it,
though they were ordered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant. That
spring a new disease broke out among the soldiers, a swelling of the
arms, legs, and face, which the doctors attributed to eating this root.
But in spite of all this, the soldiers of Denísov’s squadron fed
chiefly on “Máshka’s sweet root,” because it was the second week
that the last of the biscuits were being doled out at the rate of half a
pound a man and the last potatoes received had sprouted and frozen.

The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatched
roofs and had become terribly thin, though still covered with tufts of
felty winter hair.

Despite this destitution, the soldiers and officers went on living just
as usual. Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, the
hussars formed line for roll call, kept things in order, groomed their
horses, polished their arms, brought in straw from the thatched roofs in
place of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which
they rose up hungry, joking about their nasty food and their hunger. As
usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves before
them naked; smoked, picked out and baked sprouting rotten potatoes, told
and listened to stories of Potëmkin’s and Suvórov’s campaigns, or
to legends of Alësha the Sly, or the priest’s laborer Mikólka.

The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes in the roofless,
half-ruined houses. The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and,
in general, food for the men. The younger ones occupied themselves as
before, some playing cards (there was plenty of money, though there was
no food), some with more innocent games, such as quoits and skittles.
The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken of, partly because
nothing certain was known about it, partly because there was a vague
feeling that in the main it was going badly.

Rostóv lived, as before, with Denísov, and since their furlough they
had become more friendly than ever. Denísov never spoke of Rostóv’s
family, but by the tender friendship his commander showed him, Rostóv
felt that the elder hussar’s luckless love for Natásha played a part
in strengthening their friendship. Denísov evidently tried to expose
Rostóv to danger as seldom as possible, and after an action greeted his
safe return with evident joy. On one of his foraging expeditions, in
a deserted and ruined village to which he had come in search of
provisions, Rostóv found a family consisting of an old Pole and his
daughter with an infant in arms. They were half clad, hungry, too weak
to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance. Rostóv
brought them to his quarters, placed them in his own lodging, and
kept them for some weeks while the old man was recovering. One of his
comrades, talking of women, began chaffing Rostóv, saying that he was
more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if he
introduced to them the pretty Polish girl he had saved. Rostóv took
the joke as an insult, flared up, and said such unpleasant things to the
officer that it was all Denísov could do to prevent a duel. When
the officer had gone away, Denísov, who did not himself know what
Rostóv’s relations with the Polish girl might be, began to upbraid
him for his quickness of temper, and Rostóv replied:

“Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I can’t tell
you how it offended me... because... well, for that reason....”

Denísov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room
without looking at Rostóv, as was his way at moments of deep feeling.

“Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostóvs are!” he muttered, and Rostóv
noticed tears in his eyes.





CHAPTER XVI

In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor’s arrival,
but Rostóv had no chance of being present at the review he held at
Bartenstein, as the Pávlograds were at the outposts far beyond that
place.

They were bivouacking. Denísov and Rostóv were living in an earth hut,
dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf. The
hut was made in the following manner, which had then come into vogue. A
trench was dug three and a half feet wide, four feet eight inches deep,
and eight feet long. At one end of the trench, steps were cut out and
these formed the entrance and vestibule. The trench itself was the room,
in which the lucky ones, such as the squadron commander, had a board,
lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance, to serve as a table. On
each side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two
and a half feet, and this did duty for bedsteads and couches. The roof
was so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trench
and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table.
Denísov, who was living luxuriously because the soldiers of his
squadron liked him, had also a board in the roof at the farther end,
with a piece of (broken but mended) glass in it for a window. When it
was very cold, embers from the soldiers’ campfire were placed on
a bent sheet of iron on the steps in the “reception room”—as
Denísov called that part of the hut—and it was then so warm that the
officers, of whom there were always some with Denísov and Rostóv, sat
in their shirt sleeves.

In April, Rostóv was on orderly duty. One morning, between seven and
eight, returning after a sleepless night, he sent for embers, changed
his rain-soaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, got warm,
then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner, and,
his face glowing from exposure to the wind and with nothing on but his
shirt, lay down on his back, putting his arms under his head. He was
pleasantly considering the probability of being promoted in a few days
for his last reconnoitering expedition, and was awaiting Denísov, who
had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk.

Suddenly he heard Denísov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut,
evidently much excited. Rostóv moved to the window to see whom he was
speaking to, and saw the quartermaster, Topchéenko.

“I ordered you not to let them eat that Máshka woot stuff!”
Denísov was shouting. “And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchúk
bwought some fwom the fields.”

“I have given the order again and again, your honor, but they don’t
obey,” answered the quartermaster.

Rostóv lay down again on his bed and thought complacently: “Let
him fuss and bustle now, my job’s done and I’m lying
down—capitally!” He could hear that Lavrúshka—that sly, bold
orderly of Denísov’s—was talking, as well as the quartermaster.
Lavrúshka was saying something about loaded wagons, biscuits, and oxen
he had seen when he had gone out for provisions.

Then Denísov’s voice was heard shouting farther and farther away.
“Saddle! Second platoon!”

“Where are they off to now?” thought Rostóv.

Five minutes later, Denísov came into the hut, climbed with muddy boots
on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his things about, took
his leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again. In answer to
Rostóv’s inquiry where he was going, he answered vaguely and crossly
that he had some business.

“Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!” said Denísov
going out, and Rostóv heard the hoofs of several horses splashing
through the mud. He did not even trouble to find out where Denísov had
gone. Having got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave
the hut till toward evening. Denísov had not yet returned. The weather
had cleared up, and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were
playing sváyka, laughing as they threw their missiles which buried
themselves in the soft mud. Rostóv joined them. In the middle of the
game, the officers saw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on
their skinny horses behind them. The wagons escorted by the hussars drew
up to the picket ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them.

“There now, Denísov has been worrying,” said Rostóv, “and here
are the provisions.”

“So they are!” said the officers. “Won’t the soldiers be
glad!”

A little behind the hussars came Denísov, accompanied by two infantry
officers with whom he was talking.

Rostóv went to meet them.

“I warn you, Captain,” one of the officers, a short thin man,
evidently very angry, was saying.

“Haven’t I told you I won’t give them up?” replied Denísov.

“You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny—seizing the transport
of one’s own army. Our men have had nothing to eat for two days.”

“And mine have had nothing for two weeks,” said Denísov.

“It is robbery! You’ll answer for it, sir!” said the infantry
officer, raising his voice.

“Now, what are you pestewing me for?” cried Denísov, suddenly
losing his temper. “I shall answer for it and not you, and you’d
better not buzz about here till you get hurt. Be off! Go!” he shouted
at the officers.

“Very well, then!” shouted the little officer, undaunted and not
riding away. “If you are determined to rob, I’ll...”

“Go to the devil! quick ma’ch, while you’re safe and sound!” and
Denísov turned his horse on the officer.

“Very well, very well!” muttered the officer, threateningly, and
turning his horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle.

“A dog astwide a fence! A weal dog astwide a fence!” shouted
Denísov after him (the most insulting expression a cavalryman can
address to a mounted infantryman) and riding up to Rostóv, he burst out
laughing.

“I’ve taken twansports from the infantwy by force!” he said.
“After all, can’t let our men starve.”

The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an
infantry regiment, but learning from Lavrúshka that the transport
was unescorted, Denísov with his hussars had seized it by force. The
soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even shared
them with the other squadrons.

The next day the regimental commander sent for Denísov, and holding his
fingers spread out before his eyes said:

“This is how I look at this affair: I know nothing about it and
won’t begin proceedings, but I advise you to ride over to the staff
and settle the business there in the commissariat department and if
possible sign a receipt for such and such stores received. If not, as
the demand was booked against an infantry regiment, there will be a row
and the affair may end badly.”

From the regimental commander’s, Denísov rode straight to the staff
with a sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evening he came
back to his dugout in a state such as Rostóv had never yet seen him in.
Denísov could not speak and gasped for breath. When Rostóv asked what
was the matter, he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a
hoarse, feeble voice.

Alarmed at Denísov’s condition, Rostóv suggested that he should
undress, drink some water, and send for the doctor.

“Twy me for wobbewy... oh! Some more water... Let them twy me, but
I’ll always thwash scoundwels... and I’ll tell the Empewo’...
Ice...” he muttered.

The regimental doctor, when he came, said it was absolutely necessary
to bleed Denísov. A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy
arm and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him.

“I get there,” began Denísov. “‘Now then, where’s your
chief’s quarters?’ They were pointed out. ‘Please to wait.’
‘I’ve widden twenty miles and have duties to attend to and no time
to wait. Announce me.’ Vewy well, so out comes their head
chief—also took it into his head to lecture me: ‘It’s
wobbewy!’—‘Wobbewy,’ I say, ‘is not done by man who seizes
pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by him who takes them to fill his
own pockets!’ ‘Will you please be silent?’ ‘Vewy good!’ Then
he says: ‘Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner, but your affair
will be passed on to headquarters.’ I go to the commissioner. I enter,
and at the table... who do you think? No, but wait a bit!... Who is it
that’s starving us?” shouted Denísov, hitting the table with the
fist of his newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down
and the tumblers on it jumped about. “Telyánin! ‘What? So it’s
you who’s starving us to death! Is it? Take this and this!’ and I
hit him so pat, stwaight on his snout... ‘Ah, what a... what a...!’
and I sta’ted fwashing him... Well, I’ve had a bit of fun I can tell
you!” cried Denísov, gleeful and yet angry, his white teeth showing
under his black mustache. “I’d have killed him if they hadn’t
taken him away!”

“But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself,” said Rostóv.
“You’ve set your arm bleeding afresh. Wait, we must tie it up
again.”

Denísov was bandaged up again and put to bed. Next day he woke calm and
cheerful.

But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostóv’s and
Denísov’s dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showed
them a paper addressed to Major Denísov from the regimental commander
in which inquiries were made about yesterday’s occurrence. The
adjutant told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad
turn: that a court-martial had been appointed, and that in view of the
severity with which marauding and insubordination were now regarded,
degradation to the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for.

The case, as represented by the offended parties, was that, after
seizing the transports, Major Denísov, being drunk, went to the chief
quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief, threatened
to strike him, and on being led out had rushed into the office and given
two officials a thrashing, and dislocated the arm of one of them.

In answer to Rostóv’s renewed questions, Denísov said, laughing,
that he thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed up
in it, but that it was all nonsense and rubbish, and he did not in the
least fear any kind of trial, and that if those scoundrels dared attack
him he would give them an answer that they would not easily forget.

Denísov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostóv knew him
too well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at heart
he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which was
evidently taking a bad turn. Every day, letters of inquiry and notices
from the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denísov was ordered
to hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before
the staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat
office. On the previous day Plátov reconnoitered with two Cossack
regiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denísov, as was his wont, rode
out in front of the outposts, parading his courage. A bullet fired by
a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg. Perhaps at
another time Denísov would not have left the regiment for so slight a
wound, but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearing
at the staff and went into hospital.





CHAPTER XVII

In June the battle of Friedland was fought, in which the Pávlograds did
not take part, and after that an armistice was proclaimed. Rostóv, who
felt his friend’s absence very much, having no news of him since he
left and feeling very anxious about his wound and the progress of his
affairs, took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit Denísov
in hospital.

The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated
by Russian and French troops. Because it was summer, when it is so
beautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a particularly
dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets,
tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about.

The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames and
panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence
that had been pulled to pieces. Several bandaged soldiers, with pale
swollen faces, were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in the
yard.

Directly Rostóv entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of
putrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian army
doctor smoking a cigar. The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant.

“I can’t tear myself to pieces,” the doctor was saying. “Come to
Makár Alexéevich in the evening. I shall be there.”

The assistant asked some further questions.

“Oh, do the best you can! Isn’t it all the same?” The doctor
noticed Rostóv coming upstairs.

“What do you want, sir?” said the doctor. “What do you want?
The bullets having spared you, do you want to try typhus? This is a
pesthouse, sir.”

“How so?” asked Rostóv.

“Typhus, sir. It’s death to go in. Only we two, Makéev and I” (he
pointed to the assistant), “keep on here. Some five of us doctors have
died in this place.... When a new one comes he is done for in a week,”
said the doctor with evident satisfaction. “Prussian doctors have been
invited here, but our allies don’t like it at all.”

Rostóv explained that he wanted to see Major Denísov of the hussars,
who was wounded.

“I don’t know. I can’t tell you, sir. Only think! I am alone in
charge of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients! It’s
well that the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee
and some lint each month or we should be lost!” he laughed. “Four
hundred, sir, and they’re always sending me fresh ones. There are four
hundred? Eh?” he asked, turning to the assistant.

The assistant looked fagged out. He was evidently vexed and impatient
for the talkative doctor to go.

“Major Denísov,” Rostóv said again. “He was wounded at
Molliten.”

“Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makéev?” queried the doctor, in a tone of
indifference.

The assistant, however, did not confirm the doctor’s words.

“Is he tall and with reddish hair?” asked the doctor.

Rostóv described Denísov’s appearance.

“There was one like that,” said the doctor, as if pleased. “That
one is dead, I fancy. However, I’ll look up our list. We had a list.
Have you got it, Makéev?”

“Makár Alexéevich has the list,” answered the assistant. “But if
you’ll step into the officers’ wards you’ll see for yourself,”
he added, turning to Rostóv.

“Ah, you’d better not go, sir,” said the doctor, “or you may
have to stay here yourself.”

But Rostóv bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant
to show him the way.

“Only don’t blame me!” the doctor shouted up after him.

Rostóv and the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smell was so
strong there that Rostóv held his nose and had to pause and collect
his strength before he could go on. A door opened to the right, and an
emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in underclothing, limped
out and, leaning against the doorpost, looked with glittering envious
eyes at those who were passing. Glancing in at the door, Rostóv
saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and
overcoats.

“May I go in and look?”

“What is there to see?” said the assistant.

But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in,
Rostóv entered the soldiers’ ward. The foul air, to which he had
already begun to get used in the corridor, was still stronger here. It
was a little different, more pungent, and one felt that this was where
it originated.

In the long room, brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows,
the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls, and
leaving a passage in the middle. Most of them were unconscious and
paid no attention to the newcomers. Those who were conscious raised
themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces, and all looked intently at
Rostóv with the same expression of hope, of relief, reproach, and
envy of another’s health. Rostóv went to the middle of the room and
looking through the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same
thing there. He stood still, looking silently around. He had not at all
expected such a sight. Just before him, almost across the middle of the
passage on the bare floor, lay a sick man, probably a Cossack to judge
by the cut of his hair. The man lay on his back, his huge arms and legs
outstretched. His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back so that
only the whites were seen, and on his bare legs and arms which were
still red, the veins stood out like cords. He was knocking the back of
his head against the floor, hoarsely uttering some word which he kept
repeating. Rostóv listened and made out the word. It was “drink,
drink, a drink!” Rostóv glanced round, looking for someone who would
put this man back in his place and bring him water.

“Who looks after the sick here?” he asked the assistant.

Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from the
next room, marching stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostóv.

“Good day, your honor!” he shouted, rolling his eyes at Rostóv and
evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities.

“Get him to his place and give him some water,” said Rostóv,
pointing to the Cossack.

“Yes, your honor,” the soldier replied complacently, and rolling
his eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter, but did not
move.

“No, it’s impossible to do anything here,” thought Rostóv,
lowering his eyes, and he was going out, but became aware of an intense
look fixed on him on his right, and he turned. Close to the corner, on
an overcoat, sat an old, unshaven, gray-bearded soldier as thin as a
skeleton, with a stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostóv.
The man’s neighbor on one side whispered something to him, pointing
at Rostóv, who noticed that the old man wanted to speak to him. He drew
nearer and saw that the old man had only one leg bent under him, the
other had been amputated above the knee. His neighbor on the other side,
who lay motionless some distance from him with his head thrown back, was
a young soldier with a snub nose. His pale waxen face was still freckled
and his eyes were rolled back. Rostóv looked at the young soldier and a
cold chill ran down his back.

“Why, this one seems...” he began, turning to the assistant.

“And how we’ve been begging, your honor,” said the old soldier,
his jaw quivering. “He’s been dead since morning. After all we’re
men, not dogs.”

“I’ll send someone at once. He shall be taken away—taken away at
once,” said the assistant hurriedly. “Let us go, your honor.”

“Yes, yes, let us go,” said Rostóv hastily, and lowering his
eyes and shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of
reproachful envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of the
room.





CHAPTER XVIII

Going along the corridor, the assistant led Rostóv to the officers’
wards, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stood open. There
were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or
sitting on them. Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing
gowns. The first person Rostóv met in the officers’ ward was a thin
little man with one arm, who was walking about the first room in a
nightcap and hospital dressing gown, with a pipe between his teeth.
Rostóv looked at him, trying to remember where he had seen him before.

“See where we’ve met again!” said the little man. “Túshin,
Túshin, don’t you remember, who gave you a lift at Schön Grabern?
And I’ve had a bit cut off, you see...” he went on with a smile,
pointing to the empty sleeve of his dressing gown. “Looking for
Vasíli Dmítrich Denísov? My neighbor,” he added, when he heard
who Rostóv wanted. “Here, here,” and Túshin led him into the next
room, from whence came sounds of several laughing voices.

“How can they laugh, or even live at all here?” thought Rostóv,
still aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong
in the soldiers’ ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those
envious looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face
of that young soldier with eyes rolled back.

Denísov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket, though
it was nearly noon.

“Ah, Wostóv? How are you, how are you?” he called out, still in the
same voice as in the regiment, but Rostóv noticed sadly that under this
habitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden feeling showed
itself in the expression of Denísov’s face and the intonations of his
voice.

His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, six weeks
after he had been hit. His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces
of the other hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostóv.
What struck him was that Denísov did not seem glad to see him, and
smiled at him unnaturally. He did not ask about the regiment, nor about
the general state of affairs, and when Rostóv spoke of these matters
did not listen.

Rostóv even noticed that Denísov did not like to be reminded of the
regiment, or in general of that other free life which was going on
outside the hospital. He seemed to try to forget that old life and
was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers. On
Rostóv’s inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at once produced from
under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the
rough draft of his answer to it. He became animated when he began
